A team of astronomers made a blockbuster claim in the fall. They said they had
discovered compelling evidence pointing to life floating in the clouds of Venus.

If true, that would be stunning. People have long gazed into the cosmos and
wondered whether something is alive out there. For an affirmative answer to
pop up on the planet in the orbit next to Earth’s would suggest that life is
not rare in the universe, but commonplace.

The astronomers, led by Jane Greaves of Cardiff University in Wales, could not
see any microscopic Venusians with their telescopes on Earth. Rather, in a
paper published in the journal Nature Astronomy, they reported the detection of
a molecule called phosphine and said they could come up with no plausible
explanation for how it could form there except as the waste product of microbes.

Five months later, after unexpected twists and nagging doubts, scientists are
not quite sure what to make of the data and what it might mean. It might spur
a renaissance in the study of Venus, which has largely been overlooked for
decades. It could point to exotic volcanism and new geological puzzles. It
could indeed be aliens. Or it could be nothing at all.

Dr. Greaves and her colleagues remain certain about their findings even as they
have lowered their estimates of how much phosphine they think is there. “I am
very confident there is phosphine in the clouds,” Dr. Greaves said.

Clara Sousa-Silva, a research scientist at the Center for Astrophysics in
Cambridge, Mass., and one of the authors of the Nature Astronomy paper, said,
“I think the team in general still feels pretty confident that it’s phosphine,
that the signal is real and that there are no real abiotic explanations.”

But, Dr. Sousa-Silva added, “there’s a lot of uncertainty in all of us.”

In the wider circle of planetary scientists, many are skeptical, if not
disbelieving. Some think that the signal is just a wiggle of noise, or that it
could be explained by sulfur dioxide, a chemical known to be in the Venus
atmosphere. For them, there is so far no persuasive evidence of phosphine — let
alone microbes that would make it — at all.

“Whatever it is, it’s going to be faint,” said Ignas Snellen, an astronomer at
Leiden University in the Netherlands who is among the skeptics. If the signal
is faint, he said, “it’s not clear whether it’s real, and, if it’s real,
whether it’s going to be phosphine or not.”
